Absentation|A member of the family leaves the security of the home environment for some reason. This may be the hero or perhaps is some other member of the family that the hero will later need to rescue. In any case, this division of the cohesive family injects initial tension into the storyline.
Interdiction|The hero is warned against some action (given an 'interdiction'). Typically this may be that the hero intends finding the absented family member.
Violation of interdiction|Guess what? The hero ignores the interdiction (warning not to do something) and goes ahead.
Reconnaissance|The villain now makes an active attempt at reconnaissance, for example searching for something valuable or trying to actively capture someone. They may speak with a member of the family who innocently divulges information or perhaps realizes that something is up and backs away in terror. They may also seek to meet the hero, perhaps knowing already the hero is special in some way.
Delivery|The villain's seeking now pays off and he or she now acquires some form of information, often about the the hero or victim. Other information can be gained, for example about a map or treasure location or the intent of the 'good guys'.
Trickery|The villain now presses further, often using the information gained in seeking to deceive the hero or victim in some way, perhaps appearing in disguise. This may include capture of the victim and coercion, getting the hero to give the villain something or persuading them that the villain is actually a friend and thereby gaining collaboration.
Complicity|The trickery of the villain now works and the hero or victim naively acts in a way that helps the villain in some way. This may range from providing the villain with something (perhaps a map or magical weapon) to actively working against good people (perhaps the villain has persuaded the hero that these other people are actually bad).
Villainy and lack|There are two parts to this stage, either or both of which may appear in the story. In the first stage, the villain causes some kind of harm, for example carrying away a victim or the desired magical object (which must be then be retrieved). Villainy may include theft, casting spells on people, murder, In the second stage, a sense of lack is identified, for example in the hero's family or within a community, whereby something is identified as lost or something becomes desirable for some reason, for example a magical object that will save people in some way.
Mediation|The hero now discovers the act of villainy or lack, perhaps finding their family or community devastated or caught up in a state of anguish and woe.
Counteraction|The hero now decides to act in a way that will resolve the lack, for example finding a needed magical item, rescuing those who are captured or otherwise defeating the villain.
Departure|The hero, having decided on the required action now leaves home in pursuit of the goal. This may be a great sending-off with ceremony and the wishes and hopes of the family or community laden on the hero, perhaps seeming like a burden. It may also be a silent and secret departure in the middle of the night, as the hero seeks to avoid perhaps the 'don't go' of a clinging parent.
Testing|Before the hero can receive help, they must first prove themselves worthy. This may be done by a series of events or mini-adventures within the story or may be a deliberate testing, typically by the donor or some other gatekeeper who will reward the hero either by giving them some magical artefact, critical information or otherwise helping the hero along the way. The test may be to perform some act, answer a riddle or otherwise prove mettle. Whilst the surface test may be physical, the actual test is often of inner quality associated with heroes, including courage, integrity and humility.
Reaction|The hero now responds to test, usually succeeding but sometimes failing and having to take another route. Tests may include taking great personal risks, battling with monsters, solving puzzles and enduring extremes of discomfort. The hero may realize the need for the challenge and may view it as an irritation that is holding up the main goal. Importantly, they must show the qualities of the hero, facing up difficulties as we all have to face tests in our own lifetimes.
Acquisition|The hero now acquires an item of some kind, often magical and usually being given by the donor as reward for passing the test. This may be potion, a weapon, and so on. The reward may also be more mundane, such as help from others or critical knowledge, but nevertheless is essential in helping the hero in completing the quest.
Guidance|The hero now moves on with the story, traveling to the region in which the object of the journey may be gained. This traveling may be a long journey or may be some form of magical transport, such as on a flying carpet or instantaneous transfer to the destination realm.
Struggle|The hero now meets the villain, usually face-to-face, and they do battle. The hero is now being tested fully and there is no way out, other than victory or defeat. The villain is a worthy opponent and the hero may falter and nearly fail at many points.
Branding|In or after the battle, the Hero is branded in some way, receiving something that changes them, usually permanently. The brand may well be a wound from the villain, perhaps poisonous or magical. It may also be the acquisition of a magical item such as a ring or item of clothing. The branding of the hero is a life-changing experience.
Victory|At last the villain is defeated in some way, often through direct combat, in which they may be killed or spared after pleading. They may be vanquished by magical means whereby they disappear or are imprisoned, such as in a genie's bottle. They may also be banished, sent away to an unnamed and distant land where they can do no harm to the hero or his constituency.
Resolution|The original act of villainy (A) is now undone by the conquest of the villain. Thus, for example, a spell may be broken, a treasure found or a captive freed. The initial lack is now resolved and the associated desire satisfied, and the reader feels a great sense of relief and satisfaction as the main story completes.
Return|The hero now sets out for home, hopefully uneventfully, although they may be carrying the treasure or artefact gained and bandits could be waiting in the wings.
Pursuit|During the journey home, the hero may be pursued by some aggressor who may seek to recover the treasure or perhaps just eat the hero! The victorious procession may well turn to flight. The hero has completed the mission and gained the treasure, and it may not be prudent to stand and fight. The pursuit may also be a race home with a competitor, perhaps a false hero, with the victor gaining the final reward.
Rescue|The pursuit is terminated when something happens to rescue the hero. This can take many forms, from the re-emergence of the helper to obstacles being placed in the way of the pursuer (by the hero or friends), the hero may be concealed or even transformed into another form.
Arrival|Unrecognized, the hero arrives back in their home territory, or perhaps in other country along the way. The lack of recognition may be a deliberate ploy by the hero who, having achieved so much, no longer seeks (and perhaps shuns) adulation. There may also be reason for secrecy as threat may still exist and the mission may not be fully complete until the treasure is handed over.
Claim|The false hero, where they appear in the story may arrive before the hero and make claims such as having completed the mission themselves and perhaps that the hero has died along the way, and thus giving reason for the false hero to win the princess. The false hero may also arrive late, openly challenging the hero as being false. The role of the false hero can be very varied and they can be heroic in their own right. A major difference with the hero is in who gets to marry the princess. Sometimes the false hero is known as such from early in the story. Sometimes also they are concealed, perhaps masquerading as a friend and helper right up to the last minute. Sometimes the existence of a traitor is known but who is not exposed until the last minute.
Task|The hero may now be asked to complete another task to demonstrate their true character and worth, including riddles, tests of endurance and other ordeal.
Solution|The task proposed to the hero is completed, demonstrating the hero's integrity, character and true worth. Where the task is used to differentiate the hero and false hero, the false hero fails and the hero succeeds.
Recognition|The true hero is at last recognized, perhaps by the resolution of the final task (where used) and perhaps by the mark or brand that they gained during earlier combat with the main villain.
Exposure|By their actions in the final duel, competition or task versus the hero, the false hero is at last seen to be what they are. They often expose themselves through the display of non-heroic actions, including cowardice, cheating and other false actions.
Transfiguration|In recognition of the hero's acknowledged achievements, they are transformed in some way to befit their new status. This may well be done through clothing, with new garments, a splendid cloak, and so on. Their wounds are dressed and their bodies cleansed. Whereas they may well have arrived tattered and dirty, they now are clean and attractive.
Punishment|The villain (if not vanquished earlier) or false hero, now fully exposed, receives some punishment. This may be lenient, harsh or something just, depending on the story and perhaps mitigating circumstances and the kindness or severity of the hero or other leading character.
Wedding|At last the hero gets the final and just rewards for all of their actions. In classic tales this may well be marrying the beautiful princess and ascending to rule as king, living 'happily ever after'. In other stories, the accolade of heroism is enough and they retire to quiet lives or even go adventuring again.